bash
Terminology(1)
Hardware: Physical components of a computer system
CPU
RAM
Hard drive/SSD
Keyboard
Monitor
Software: Collection of instructions and data that tells the harware what to do.
System Software
Application Software
Program: Specific set of instructions written in a programming language to perform task.

! Every program is a software but not every software is a program !
Terminology (2)
OS, is a collection of software that manages hardware resources and provides services for programs.
Linux
macOS
Windows
Kernel is the core of the OS . It directly controls the CPU, memory, and hardware devices.
It acts as the bridge between software and hardware.
Shell is a program that accepts commands from the user and passes them to the kernel for execution.
Translator between the user and the machine.
Terminology (3)
Command Line Interface-CLI: User interact with the computer by typing text commands.

It's fast, scriptable, and works great over remote connections : e.g.SSH

Graphical User Interface-GUI: User interact through windows, icons, and menus.

More intuitive for beginners but slower for repetitve tasks and not always avaliable on servers.
Terminology (4)
Server: a computer designed to process request and deliver data to another computer over a local network or the internet.
High Performance Computing (HPC) : cluster of many servers networked together to act as a single, massive supercomputer.
SSH-Secure Shell : a cryptographic network protocol.
!! Most HPC clusters and cloud servers don't have a GUI. All your genome assemblies, alignments, and analyses will run through the terminal !!
Why Linux?
Free & open source : no licensing costs, critical for academic research

Stability : Linux servers can run for years without rebooting

Most bioinformatics tools are built for Linux : tools like GATK, BWA, Samtools, Kraken2, BLAST are all Linux-native

Scripting & automation : easily automate repetitive tasks (e.g., processing 100 samples with one script)

Remote computing : HPC clusters (SLURM, PBS) run Linux

Reproducibility : shell scripts document exactly what you did
UNIX vs. GNU
UNIX: developed in 1969 at AT&T Bell Labs by Ken Thompson and Dennis Ritchie.
GNU(GNU's Not Unix) Project: is a free software project (1983) based on Unix.
Linux Kernel: Created by Linus Torvalds in 1991.
GNU /LINUX
a complete, free operating system
What is BASH ?
BASH-(Bourne Again SHell): Written by Brian Fox in 1989 as a free replacement for the original Bourne Shell (sh).
It's the default shell on most Linux systems .
Bourne Shell-sh: Written by Stephen R. Bourne at 1976.
You can check your current shell by typing: echo $SHELL
File System Organization (1)
Root (/): Were the address system of the computer starts.
Everything lives under the root.
Shown as /
Home: Where the current user's location starts.
Shown as ~
On Windows and Mac home directory is a directory inside directory called Users and on Unix/Linux systems it is called home.

/home/username/         on Linux
/Users/username/         on Mac
C:\Users\username\     on Windows
File System Organization (2)
Absolute path : adress that starts from either from root(/) or home(~/) location.
It works from anywhere.
Relative path : adress that starts from wherever we are currently sitting.
Each file and directory has it's own address-path.
.  current directory
..  parent directory of current directory
General Syntax
$ = prompt (shell is ready for input)
command = the program to run (ls, grep, cat)
-option/flag = modifies behavior. Use with -  and can be merged.
argument = what the command acts on (a file, directory, or pattern)
repl: Read-eval-prınt-loop
The shell operates in a Read-Eval-Print Loop.

Read : shell reads what you typed
Eval : shell interprets and executes it
Print : shell prints the output to screen
Loop : shell waits for the next command
Space & Case Sensitive & Extension
!! Spaces are special !!
The command line uses spaces to know how to properly break things apart.
Spaces separate the command, options, and arguments.

This is why it's not ideal to have filenames that contain spaces, but rather it's better to use underscores (_).
! File names in Linux, like Unix, are case sensitive !
The file names "File1" and "file1" refer to different files.
! Linux has no concept of a "file extension" like Windows systems !
You may name files any way you like.
However, while Linux itself does not care about file extensions, many application programs do.
man : Manual
The man command used to access built-in documentation for commands, utilities, system calls, and library functions

! only for external commands
help
The help command specifically designed to provide documentation for other built-in shell commands.
--help
The --help flag used to access quick usage information.
pwd : Print Working Directory
The pwd command prints the current directory we stand.
Home directory is first directory opens with terminal.
cd : Change Directory
The cd command allows users to move from the current working directory to another specified directory by providing either an absolute path or a relative path.
cd ..  → Go up one directory level :parent directory
cd ../..  → Go up two directory levels
cd -   → Go back to the previous directory
cd ~  → Go to the home directory
ls : List
The ls command list the contents of the current working directory or a specified path.

Lists items in alphabetical order by default.
ls -l → Long listing format
ls -lh → Long listing + human-readable sizes
ls -a → Show all files (including hidden)
ls -lt → Sort by modification time (newest first)
ls -lS → Sort by file size (largest first)
ls -R → Lists files in the current directory and all subdirectories
ls /data/samples/ → List contents of a specific directory
Permissions
 d- rwx
head & tail
The head command displays the first 10 lines of a file by default.
The tail command displays the last 10 lines of a file.
With -n flag we can specify the line number.
head -n 3 → print first 3 lines
head -n -3 → print all lines except last 3 lines
tail -n 5 → print last 5 lines.
tail -n +2 → print everything exept the first line
wc : Word Count
The wc command is useful for counting how many lines,words, and bytes counts for files.
-l → print just how many lines are in a file
-w →print just how many words are in a file
-c → print just how many bytes are in a file
-m → print just how many characters are in a file
💡 wc -l on a FASTQ file gives you total lines. Divide by 4 to get the read count.

cat : concatenate
The cat command is used to read, display, and combine files directly in the terminal.
Prints the entire content of a file to the terminal screen.
💡 Most modern sequencing data comes as .fastq.gz .Use zcat instead of cat so you don't have to decompress first.
zcat
cat > myfile.txt
cat file1.txt file2.txt > merged.txt
less
The less command is used for viewing the contents of text files one screenful at a time.

less is like more but much more powerful : you can scroll both forward and backward.

less can handle gzip files directly!
Space or f → forward one page
b → back one page
g → go to beginning
G → go to end
/pattern → search forward, n next match, N previous
?pattern → search backward
-S → Chops long lines (disables line wrapping)
q → quit
file
It identifies file types by examining their content rather than their file extensions.
💡 In bioinformatics this is very useful. A file named .txt might actually be gzip-compressed. file reveals the truth regardless of the extension.
touch
The touch command creates files.
cp : Copy
The cp command duplicates files and directories from one location to another.
mkdir : Make Directory
The mkdir command creates directories.
rm : Remove
The rm command removes (deletes) files and directories.
⚠️ There is NO trash bin in the terminal ⚠️
Deleted = gone forever.
mv : Move
The mv command will either move one or more files to a different directory, or it will rename a file or directory.
rm alone cannot delete directories.
-r or -R deletes a directory and all of its contents.
Wildcards
Wildcards as used at the command line are special characters that enable us to specify multiple items very easily.
The * means any character, any number of times (including 0 times).
The ? wildcard represents any character that appears only one time.
The {} (brace expansion) generates multiple strings by specifying a range or a set of values.
file_{a,b,c}.txt
file_{01..100}.txt
grep : Global Regular Expression Print
The grep command is used to search for specific text patterns within files or input streams.

-A n → Display n lines After the match.
-B n → Display n lines Before the match.
-C n → Display n lines around (both before and after) the match.
-i → Ignore case: Matches both uppercase and lowercase.
-c → Count: Returns only the total number of matching lines.
-w → Whole word: Matches only the exact word, not substrings.
💡 For searching FASTQ files for specific sequence:

grep -B1 -A2 "XXXX" sequence1.fastq
Redirector
Pipe (|) is used to connect multiple commands. It takes the output from the previous command and "pipes" it into the input of the following command.
Overwrite >  This is used to send the output of a command to a file instead of showing it on your screen.
If the file already exists, it deletes everything inside and replaces it with the new data. If the file doesn't exist, it creates a new one.
Append >> It adds the new data to the end of the existing file. It does not delete what was already there.